>> Name's John Rosasco, my colleague Benj Lipchak are here
today to present to you OpenGL ES Tuning and Techniques.
So without further adieu, let's get going with this session.
So in today's session, we're going to cover some of
the hardware architecture and some of the differences
between the iPhone and iPod Touch family of devices
and the new iPhone 3G S and how the difference
in those architectures will affect application
performance and how to program to them.
We're then going to take a look at a list of top
ten performance optimizations that we've compiled,
to try and help steer you clear of any pitfalls
that you may run into while writing your app.
Once we've gone through that list and Ben just helped
me demonstrate how to approach and resolve some
of those problems, we're going to look
at a section on finding bottlenecks.
So let's go into hardware.
The family of iPhone and iPod Touches prior to the iPhone 3G
S recently announced, are all based on the PowerVR MBX-lite,
which you may have seen in some of the earlier sessions.
These devices use a tile base deferred renderer
and we're going to talk some about how that differs
from a stream renderer in today's session and this
family of devices supports OpenGL ES 1.1 only.
There's an architectural difference that's relevant
and we'll talk to some details about that as well
and there's a fairly hard limit on texture and
surface memory for the MBX-lite family of devices.
Moving on to the new iPhone 3G S hardware architecture.
This is based on the PowerVR SGX and this also uses a tile
based deferred renderer and it supports both OpenGL ES 1.1
and 2.0, which implies of course it has, it's fully
programmable and has a hardware shading capability.
The iPhone 3G S has a much higher
memory bandwidth capability
and there's no real hard limit as you saw in the MBX family.
You get more of a kind of linear drop off in performance
as you increase the load on, the memory load on the system.
A couple of other notable differences with the
iPhone 3G S is that it has hardware VBO support,
so VBO performance is increased because of
that and there's also stencil buffer support.
So tile based deferred rendering.
Let's talk about that a little bit.
The slide here is showing what a stream rendering
GPU and that's kind of a conventional GPU that many
of you may have programmed prior
to the iPhone family of GPU's
The sudo code that you're seeing
there at the top is relatively simple
and there's an outer while loop there showing while there
are more rendering commands, compile a set of state changes
and then take those state changes with some draw command
and effectively draw the data at that point in time.
Once you've iterated over that full list of draw
commands and all the state changes that go with each
of those draw commands, you go to this simple
set up of presenting the data on screen
for view with the presentRenderBuffer call.
So notice that's a pretty simple set of
sudo code and notice this is all-specific.
This isn't really a CPU side sudo code you're looking at,
it's just what the GPU's doing to draw a single frame.
So let's compare that to a tile based
deferred renderer that's on the iPhone,
on the entire iPhone and iPod Touch family.
This sudo code as you notice is a
little bit more sophisticated than it is
for a streamer renderer, a little more complex.
There is this initial highlighted code that you're
seeing here, essentially showing that each frame
of rendering is cached, so all of the drawing
commands for that frame of rendering are cached
and while there are more drawing commands on all the
state changes that influence those drawing commands
that the system caches that to allow it to effectively
take advantage of how the scene data is arranged
so that it can call and run at higher performance.
So once that data is all cached, each frame of data
is divided effectively into screen tiles and a list
of drawing commands is created for each of those tiles.
So once you've done that division, you know what's
required to draw each tile and all the drawing commands,
the set of tiles for the frame buffer is iterated
over and each of those tiles requires that the color,
the depth and the stencil buffers are all loaded.
Then the visibility of the pixels for that tile
is determined using that list of drawing commands.
Then the fragment shader is executed
for those visible pixels and the color,
depth and stencil buffers are then stored out.
So once each of the entire set of tiles has been
processed, the data is presented on screen as it was simply
with the present RunnerBuffer as in the previous slide.
So all this sophisticated sudo code, why
is that relevant to your application?
There's a couple of reasons.
Specifically I guess starting with while, why that
more complicated rendering model to begin with.
Well effectively, that TBDR is set up to do
better on chip utilization of data essentially.
So you're not doing as many memory accesses as if you
just constrain the drawing to a single tile worth of data,
frame buffer data and all the drawing command associated
with it, you can keep all that processing on chip
so it makes for a much higher performance GPU.
So you have this higher performance but there is a couple
of caveats that are associated with that and that is
at any time that you have a drawing command that has
a dependency, a downstream dependency in the stream
of rendering, it can cause a performance problem on
this architecture that is a bit dissimilar to that
of a stream renderer and some examples of those rendering
commands with these dependencies are frame-buffer binds,
read pixels calls and anything that does texture updating.
So let's take a look at an ideal kind of frame architecture.
If you take all of those things in mind, what is it that you
need to do, how do you need to lay out your frame drawing
and all the commands there in such that you're not
going to violate this TBDR architecture and you're going
to help it along to do the fastest frame rendering it can.
So the beginning of this frame, it's always advisable on
this TBDR to avoid texture updates in general and that is
because in order for the TBDR to cache entire frames
of rendering, anytime you do a texture modification,
the TBDR has to make a copy of that data because there
could be some drawing that's going to happen with that
and if it's caching a frame's worth of rendering
and it needs to be able to process it, it may,
it has to make another copy of that data.
So that's why the comment you see here on the slide
about avoiding this if possible but if you do need
to do texture updates during your frame
rendering, rather than just pre-computing them
and binding textures, do them at
the beginning of your frame.
That way you won't cause a flush and
interruption in mid-frame while you're rendering.
Down below that is the initial call to bind the framebuffer.
So you'd bind your framebuffer there, you do your clear and
then any other GL commands in the frame and then getting
down toward the end, the last draw command is listed there.
And then if you have to do readpixels, try to avoid that if
possible because it's very expensive on the architecture,
but some applications actually require that.
Do that at the very end of the frame for the same
reason, you don't interrupt the command stream and you,
kind your kind of, this laminar
flow and the high frame rate going.
So let's move into that top ten list we were talking about
earlier in the intro and I'm going to hand it over to Benj
to describe how we're going to
go about attacking these items.
>> Thanks John.
So hi, I'm Benj.
John and I thought it would be fun for this
session to artificially construct a demo app
in our laboratory which does everything wrong.
So all of those top ten list items
you just saw, ignore them all
and it basically serves an example of how not to do things.
So that way one by one we can turn on the right way
of doing things and see the performance improvement.
And one thing I'll say up front is that we targeted
OpenGL ES 2.0 with this app and that's primarily just
because the last item in the top
ten list is all about shaders.
But all the rest of the tips applied to both OpenGL
ES 1.1 and 2.0 and so not only this iPhone 3G S
which we'll be demoing on, but also
other iPhones and iPod Touches.
So let me describe the app to you while I run it in the
simulator, just so you can see what I'm talking about.
Bring down the heads up display.
OK, so the spheres that you're seeing spinning around
there, those are actually four sided polyhedral
that have been tessellated recursively a bunch
times in order to increase our vertex load,
each time pushing the vertices out to radius 1.
So that's why they look like spheres.
And each of the original faces of the
tetrahedron has a different rendering state
and so it has different shaders, different textures.
Some of the ones you can see there, you've got a picture
of the Earth plastered onto one side, you've got,
you can see the colorful side, that's actually
the normals being visualized, the face normals.
So you can see the tessellation One of those
sides has kind of a polished sea stone look to it.
It's got a fong shader.
And the fourth side is using blending to toss out some
of the pixels and keep the rest of them semitransparent.
So then we take that sphere, we've got
seven of them going from the foreground
out into the distance and so this is pretty simple demo app.
There's no bunnies being inflated,
there's no cars with environmental mapping
with funnel turn being twisted.
So you might ask, what could possibly go
wrong here and the answer is about ten things.
So with that I would like to official conclude our
use of the simulator in this session and that is
because simulator is a great prototyping tool,
but it has drastically different performance
characteristics than the target devices.
And so I'm going to switch over to the phone now.
Nice. OK. Where you can see what is basically
a slide show of the sphere family vacation,
running at about 6, 6 1/2 frames per second in there.
And so with that I'm going to bring
up a tool that you should use as part
of your performance tuning arsenal
and that's called Instruments.
And you can see there is an OpenGL ES template here.
We're going to choose that.
I'm going to attach to our running
process and I'm going to click Record.
And at this point, well you can
notice the CPU is pretty much pegged.
This is the CPU load down here.
But what I'm interested right now in is the Core Animation
frames per second, which is showing about the same thing
as we're seeing on screen there
with the frames per second counter.
Getting about 6 frames per second.
One interesting thing you should note
about core animation frames per second,
this is the number of frames per second
being sent to the compositing engine.
So if you're doing off screen rendering to
FBO, that's not counted against this limit.
So here we are with our OptimizeMe App,
called OptimizeMe, you can guess why.
We starting off at around 6 frames per
second and it's totally broken state
with ignoring all the top ten list items, so
this is a good time to send it back to John
to talk about those first top ten list items.
>> OK thanks Benj.
Let's get started on that top ten list.
The first on our list is avoiding
alpha test and fragment shader discard.
Alpha test is a costly operation on these TBDR renderers.
It effectively defeats the hidden surface, hidden surface
removal and the culling, the core screen culling that can,
that the you know, gathering all that
frame data allows the TBDR to do.
Usually alpha test can be, that operation can be very
well simulated or duplicated using frame buffer blending,
especially if you have a fragment shader in combination
so you can modulate the alpha value and have it feed
into the blending functions that you've got set
on the frame buffer to achieve the same effect
that you would doing an alpha test kind of discard.
The use of the keyword discard and a fragment
shader under ES 2.0, is also an expensive operation
because it causes the GPU to have to
go through an expensive visibility test
for all the fragments that are going to be generated.
So the use of discard is discouraged in general.
So let's move on to number two.
Don't depth-sort opaque surfaces.
Conventional kind of stream renderer's it's natural to
do a depth-sorting of opaque surfaces so that you can,
so that you can basically take the data and
at the depth test, discard the fragments.
Because the TBDR is doing that for you and you know,
doing this core stream culling that we're talking
with the hidden surface removal, you're effectively
kind of defeating that mechanism by depth,
doing the depth-sort of the opaque surfaces, and
you're essentially performing a redundant operation.
So it's kind of expensive.
When it comes to the draw order of your data in
your scene, there is an advisable kind of pattern
of these three latter bullets that
you're seeing on the slide.
And that is to render the opaque object first
and that is effectively because you're kind
of successively refining your frame data and if you can, the
more, the larger chunks of stuff you can get rid of earlier
on in your frame rendering, the
higher performance it will be.
By rendering these big opaque objects first, all of the
fragment processing, vertex processing, all of the blending,
all of those operations on anything that would
have been obscured essentially gets avoided.
If you do need to use discard however,
given that it is expensive,
it's nice that you have that second in the list here.
Because those opaque objects may prevent
that operation as well, but put those second.
And then finally, because blending, anything that's
blended is going to depend on destination fragments
in your frame buffer, you need to
render those in sorted order last.
So going back through the list, render opaque objects first,
then render each of these kind of implies a grouping right.
So if you have like a scene of data that you're rendering,
it's sometimes tough in your application to take that domain
of how your scene rendering is done and shuffle it
around, shuffle the data around so that it's grouped
such that it works well with the renderer.
But if you can group all of your opaque objects
so that and then those with discard and then those
with blending together, it will allow you to kind of execute
in this order and get the optimal kind of performance
out of these renderer's So moving on to number three.
Number three is a little bit more of generic advice.
A lot of today's session that Benj and I are doing
is really targeted at kind of device specifics.
You know you saw the earlier sessions with the kind
of foundation layer that Michael and Alex built
and then the cool rendering techniques and you know, kind
of accessorizing you can do that Alex and Luke described.
Well this session is you know, about the tuning
and it's kind of, it's got pieces of both kind
of general GL programming advice
and others that are device specific.
This one kind of falls into that general programming
area where you want to batch as much drawing,
general GL programming that is, that you want to batch
as much drawing as you can and minimize state changes.
Every time you issue a draw call,
there's an overhead associated with it.
So naturally, if you, if you've got 10,000 vertices
to render, if you issue one draw call to do that,
you're going to get much higher performance
than if you issue 100 calls to do that.
So there's an example here showing that kind of competition
between application domain space problems
and pipeline efficiency domain space.
So pipeline efficiency, there's a couple of these
examples in this presentation that are like this and Benj
and I realize the hazard of presenting the wrong way to do
stuff on the slides, but we thought it was worthwhile doing
because hopefully it's triggering you know, one or
two people to say hey, wait, that's how I'm doing it.
So the better of these two examples is at the top, the
top condition of that if and that's the batched rendering.
Where a single VBO is bound on the first program statement,
second to that a leaf texture is drawn and then an array
of leaves is drawn with that rendering state.
This atrocious example in the else condition has a
draw command that's essentially a leaf draw method,
is up here and it's iterating over all of the leaves,
asking the tree which leaf it is and then the leaves,
you know you have this nice cool oops thing with
this encapsulation where it knows how to draw itself,
but in the process it disregards the rendering state of the
rest of the pipeline and completely thrashes it with all
of these instances to draw where it's binding
the VBO redundantly and it's extra etc,
etc. So that is a paramount performance
issue and it happens.
It's a pretty pervasive problem.
So try to keep the lookout for that when you're
looking to tune your application or better yet,
when you're architecting your scene graph to begin with.
So with those three, I'm going to hand it back to Benj and
he's going to apply some of that to our broken application.
>> OK thanks.
Thanks John.
All right, the first stuff that John
talked about is really easy one to show.
Here you're seeing one of our slow fragment shaders.
So we have slow versions of our shaders
and fast versions for this demo app.
Here you see we are discarding pixels if the computed
alpha value in the fragment shader is close to 0
and also if the incoming color is non-opaque.
So if those two conditions are true,
we are discarding our pixel entirely.
This is similar to alpha test in ES 1.1.
Now in the fast version of the shader, we just remove
the discard entirely and we turn on blending and we end
up getting the same result on the frame buffer.
So that was an easy one to show.
Next tip that John talked about was about not
spending CPU time sorting your opaque geometry.
Some of the sub-bullets there were that
you do want to draw your opaque stuff first
and then anything that's discarded or blended.
So you can see in our code here, we are drawing
the first three quadrants of our spheres opaque,
so we're drawing those first, followed by fourth quadrant,
which is the one that we use discard or
we replace the discard with blending.
And we draw that last.
So that brings me to the next one, which is about state
grouping, and this is the example of how not to do it.
So you can see here, we are looping over all seven
of our spheres and for each sphere we're setting
up a rendering state for the first quadrant, drawing that
quadrant, setting up rendering state for the next quadrant,
drawing that one and so on, for all four quadrants.
Then we go to the next object and do
that same thing over and over again.
So for every object we're switching between every
state, that's the suboptimal way of doing it.
Instead, we recommend you group your
state like John was talking about.
And so here, we've drawn the pieces of each object that
use the initial state, then we switch to state one.
So here, you're seeing setting up the first state, then
we loop over all objects and drawing just the pieces
of those objects that use that state and we move on
to the next state, loop over all the objects there.
The last one I want to talk about
here is batching your data.
So when I said that we artificially
constructed this demo app in our laboratory,
I failed to mention it's an evil laboratory and we are
drawing each triangle individually with its own draw call.
The better way of doing this, infinitely
better, is to batch up your draws
so you're drawing lots of triangles all at once.
So in this case we are drawing and entire quadrant at a time
and it makes a huge difference and I'd like to demonstrate.
So if we can bring up the phones side by side.
I think for starters, so this is where
we left off around 6 frames per second.
I already have Instruments running here.
So I want you to keep your eye on the CPU, because
not batching up your draws, not combining like state,
has a pretty nasty CPU overhead required for
validating and setting up each draw call.
So I'm pulling up the heads of displays, I'm going
to turn on state grouping and batching and I'll have
to keep animating and there you can see we've just
jumped up from 6 to about 15 or 16 frames per second
and notice the CPU load here has
gone down to almost nothing.
So with that let me send it back to John to
talk about the next bunch of top ten tips.
>> OK. Thanks Benj.
So four and five are regarding data management with
number four being proper vertex data management.
The inputs to GL as you know, are vertices and pixels
and how you treat those vertices is very important.
Probably the easiest advice you can get for
better kind of vertex handling is to use VBO's.
VBO's are really dovetailed in really easily
with the vertex array specification in GL
and it's a very simple matter to use VBO.
So if you're not using them already,
go ahead and make that switch.
It's a very comfortable change.
The second tip that's very important on the iPhone
architectures is to keep the, keep the vertices's,
the vertex data each of the attributes for you
vertex data, aligned on four white boundaries.
And that may include increasing the size of
the vertex if it gets you better alignment
and there's always some empiricism involved in there but
you know, if you can put you know, three component normals
on 4 byte boundaries, you despite the fact
that you have an additional component there
and you know the memory associated with it,
you may actually get higher performance.
So keep that in mind.
Use of smaller data types, do some
empiricism around that too.
If you can get away with a short instead of a float
for instance or an unsigned byte instead of a short,
by all means take a look at those and conserve
bandwidth in the system, especially embedded systems.
And then interleaving the vertex data.
With these diagrams on the right just showing a
simple way to improve cache locality so that the
when a device fetches individual vertices,
it's got all of the relevant information
in a kind of cache coherent friendly manner.
So a small example here of proper vertex data alignment
with the good case on the top, faster, smaller,
interleave the line vertices and the bad case on the bottom.
The top example is showing 16 bytes per vertex.
We've got a struct there defined and so
we have an array of structs effectively
and each of the types is unsigned.I'm sorry,
shorts rather and they're four components each.
So notice that as I alluded to a moment ago, that the
normal pointer there is using the size of that structure
as the stride between each subsequent normal.
And although there's additional memory
associated with that, this is higher performance.
So keep that in mind when you're constructing it.
It doesn't matter the number of vertex attributes.
The example shown here is in ES 1.1, it's the
same you know, general idea in 2.0 certainly.
On the bottom the slow performing example, is using
a bigger data type for the vertex information.
It's using floats.
Your app may need that, it may not.
And then it's using shorts for the normals
and in this case, it's three components each.
When that data adds up and in the case of the vertex data,
those are well aligned because they're four bytes apiece
and there's three components so no problem, but the
normal data is not and each of those has to be fetched
on a per vertex basis and that's going to slow your
app down if your vertex data is arranged as such.
So moving on to texture data management.
Tip number five.
A really easy thing is use compressed textures and
now I hope I'm not hammering an issue that's you know,
going to be the proverbial beating the dead horse
here but, the compressed textures are a great way
to improve the memory efficiency of your
application and reduce the bandwidth demands.
Hopefully some of you have had a chance to work with
the texture tool in the PBRTC compressed texture format.
If you have you probably noticed that not only can you
get higher performance because you're putting less demand
on the system, but the compressed textures
actually will give you higher quality too
and with lossy compression, that's
totally counterintuitive.
It's like why would that give me higher quality?
Well even the 4 bit per component, compressed
texture format, PBRTC, is eight time smaller,
it's 1/8th the size of a 4 component
unsigned byte texture format.
So that means that if you double the
size of the textures you're using
in two dimensions you're still using
only half the memory footprint.
And if you take a look at those textures side by
side and Benj will go into that in some detail
when we take a look there, you'll notice that most
of the time you'll get much better
quality with the compressed textures.
Now there are some exceptions to that
and that's application domain specific.
Certainly if you're doing a lot of textures that
are line art or vector based and you have you know,
real low frequency images with high contrast edges
and these sort of things, you can sometimes see some
of the ringing artifacts and macroblocks
that you get out of texture compression.
But for anything that comes off of a camera or anything
that's even remotely analog and many of the kind
of simple textures for games and things like
that, they work great as compressed textures.
Much higher quality, much higher performance.
Use of mipmapping, now that's an old adage
that goes with any GL application programming.
There's an additional one third
memory allocation required for that.
But on the back end, when the texture is processed and those
texels are fetched, the CPU effectively is allowed to fetch
from smaller texture levels and that
can really conserve on the bandwidth.
Going hand in hand with mipmapping is
deciding on what type of filtering to do.
If you use mipmapping, it's kind of natural to think OK,
well I'm going to do tri-linear filtering so I can look
at it not only in the neighborhood of the current
level but the levels that are before and after it.
That's a natural thing to do but, note that that takes
double the operations than a bi-linear filter does.
So you may want to do that quick switch of
that text parameter to geo linear to try
to the bi-linear filtering mode to see if it actually
affects you rendering quality and if it doesn't
by all means turn that to bi-linear
and save yourself some performance.
The next bullet here is use texture atlases.
The use of texture atlases, well it doesn't jive too well
with the use of mipmapping because you're going to get kind
of filtering artifacts when you try
to go through that mipmapping chain.
That's really not a memory bandwidth saving
tip, it's more of a state management tip.
So if you're able to create this mothership texture
and it's got you know, fifty little textures in it
and you can do a single texture bind and then do, use
texture coordinates and maybe some scales and biases
to extract the texels you want from that, you're going
to get a lot higher performance than if you go through
and you know you got a single character and
he's got you know, fourteen texture on them
and doing fourteen different texture
binds to accessorize that guy.
So use texture atlases when you can.
We talked about avoiding mid-frame texture updates
and again, that's a memory kind of footprint issue
and again there's a copy associated with
that on the TBDR, so those should be avoided.
So a code sample here is a simple loading if a
compressed texture, mipmap stack and these textures,
if you haven't had a chance, if you haven't had
a chance to work with the compressed textures,
you use the offline texture tool that's part of the iPhone
developer SDK to compute these texture levels offline
and then just go through and iterate overall levels.
We talked about the filtering mode, bi-linear versus
tri-linear, that's the second, the text parameter line
that you're seeing there with the last argument
there dictating whether you're doing bi-linear
or tri-linear filtering.
If you want to do bi-linear filtering, you
simply switch that last parameter to GL linear.
Moving down there, you're always going to have to set your
you know, the commensurate kind of mad filter and rat modes,
but that's not really relevant to this example
and then just iterate over the text levels
and load the texture, the compressed texture.
It's fairly simple.
So minimizing memory footprint, this is a little bit
of a rehash but whenever you go to look at performance
of an application, one of the toughest thing can be
like where do I look and how do I tune this application?
Well if you generally are a good steward of the
bytes on your system and you're very conscientious
about how you use them, you'll have a lot less trouble
kind of diagnosing performance problems down the way.
So the use of these smaller and more efficient texture and
vertex form and the mid-frame texture updates of course,
but also consider how your depth buffer is allocated.
Do you need a depth buffer and if you do,
can you get away with 16 bits versus 32?
The same argument can be made for color buffer set up.
The visible color buffer when you specify the dictionary
for the EAGL Layers properties that you probably saw in some
of the earlier sessions, you can reduce the size of the
color buffer if it's not needed and any of these steps,
all of these things in cooperation will
reduce the bandwidth pressure on the system
and will increase the performance undoubtedly.
So with that I'm going to hand it back
over to Benj for four, five and six.
>> Thank you John.
So this groups of tips was all about data management
and we're going to start by looking at vertex data.
Here is an example of how not to store your geometry.
This is code that is not using VBO's, so
we're using client side vertex arrays
You'll notice there's no buffer object found and we malloc
our own data here, getting back a pointer to client memory.
Pay no attention to this misalignment bytes term.
I'll talk about that in just a moment.
But our vertex array pointers are all pointers to
the actual client memory here and the code subsequent
to this will then fill in our tessellated
geometry at this next vertex data pointer.
So now, let me bring you to the VBO version of
this code, right up here, which looks very similar.
Difference being we have a non-zero buffer object bound and
instead of calling malloc, we are calling GL buffer data
to allocate memory and manage it for us by the GL.
Now our vertex attribute pointers are no
longer actual pointers to client memory,
instead they are offsets, starting
at 0, within our buffer object.
And finally, we map our buffer object.
So again, we have a CPU accessible pointer and we'll
continue to fill that data the same way as we did
in the non-VBO case with our tessellated geometry.
And later on, we'll unmap it before we draw with it.
So now, let's talk about this misalignment bytes term.
What better way to demonstrate how bad it is
to not have your vertex array data aligned,
then to intentionally throw it off by a byte.
So again, evil laboratory, so we're allocating, you
can see we're calculating our size for our allocation.
We're just allocating an extra byte.
All of our vertex array pointers, whether they're
in VBO's or not, are all offset by one byte
and you'd be surprised the impact that
can have and you'll get to see it.
So next, let's talk about texture data management.
And for this I will talk about a couple
techniques, which are near and dear to my heart,
well won't really talk about them, John
talked about them so I'm just going to show.
So here, you see side by side,
uncompressed and compressed textures.
So John talked about the performance gains, you're
probably familiar with wide use compressed textures
for performance reasons but you may still be asking
yourself, why do I really want to use compressed textures,
don't they degrade the image quality, not improve it.
And so I'd like to spin it the other way and show
you in kind of an apples to apples comparison.
On the left here you have 32 bit per pixel
uncompressed 128x128 dimension texture
and for the exact same memory footprint cost, here is
a 512x512 2 bit per pixel PBRTC compressed texture.
And you can probably see, I'll zoom
in for the people in the back row,
just a little bit, but you know, huge difference here.
So that's why we recommend using the compressed formats.
You can actually, for the same cost,
get a much better image quality.
And now if we can bring up the phone as well.
I would like to show, actually if we can go full screen
for a moment on the phone, if we have that technology.
Great. Because we'd like to, I'd like to look at the
furthest away spheres showing the Earth texture on them.
I've freeze framed it.
Look at the white sparklies.
As I animate it again, you can kind of see
them shimmering off in the distance there.
Now I'm going to turn on mipmapping and now once the,
once it spins around you can see the Earth again,
no more shimmering, it's a nice, smooth Earth texture.
So you're not getting those aliasing artifacts.
Now if we can go split screen again, I'm going to
go to Instruments and going to start recording here.
I want to show you the memory footprint
difference as we turn on alignment, OK,
compressed textures is the one
we're mostly interested in in here
and now this resource bytes metric,
I haven't talked about yet.
This is all of the resources used by ES,
that includes textures, render buffers
and on the iPhone 3G S, it includes vertex buffer objects.
And I will tell this to keep animating and you can see that
the resource bytes went from about 40 megs to unde@r 20 megs,
just from turning on the compressed textures.
Now you might be thinking well, that 20 megs
still seems like a lot for this simple demo app,
keeping the note about some of these, actually
all of the metrics sampled here by Instruments,
these are sampled across the entire system.
So what you're seeing there isn't
necessarily caused by your own app.
There's lots of other things going on in the system, many
things layered on top of OpenGL ES, so keep that in mind.
What you're seeing here isn't just caused by you.
But if you make changes in your app, you can see
the differences as they affect the entire system.
So we're now up to about 22 frames per second,
jumping around around 20, 22, up from the original 6.
With that, I'd like to send it back to
John to talk about the last group of tips.
>> OK thanks Benj.
So moving on to number seven.
Number seven is related to the iPhone compositing
system and how your GL application interacts
with core animation in the layering system.
It's, this is kind of an A or B kind of advice.
It's relatively simple to just take your GL
and use your GL to draw your landscape content.
Unfortunately, it's even simpler to use Core
Animation to do it, but the performance isn't as good.
So try not to take that carrot of just doing a
layer transform and using Core Animation, you know,
the layer property for Core Animation to do
your layer, to do your landscape transforms.
There is, when you get a landscape event, you can simply
swap the width and height on your viewport calculations
and do kind of a rotation about Z, to keep your model
upright when you're, when the device gets landscaped so.
Moving on to tip number eight.
Making your GL layer opaque.
It's always a good idea in this compositing system,
you're going to have any number of layers there and
but the best way to get the best performance
out of a compositing system is to make sure
that all your 2D content is on- top, the GL content is
on the bottom, then opaque and it's a simple matter
of setting the property on the layer
as in the example here, where you're,
this is drawn directly from that
OpenGL ES template application
that is created when you create a new project in Xcode.
And it's simply a manner of obtaining a layer and setting
that property to ES and then that layer will be opaque
and it will tell Core Animation not to be
compositing your GL content to things below it.
So draw only when needed.
It's like duh right, but there's a little bit of
a trap when it comes to writing code for embedded devices
and that is that you're not plugged into the wall anymore.
So if you're not plugged into the wall,
anytime you render and you keep the GPU
and the CPU busy, it's eating up your battery.
So you really want to take a look at your application
domain and say OK well, my data's not really that dynamic,
maybe I can get away with 30 frames
a second or 15 rather than 60.
So setting the animation interval, again
drawing on the ES template application,
to a larger interval such that you're
not, you're just not just hammering away
on the GPU can really be friendly
to your user's battery life.
And then the other thing is, if your data is
really static, the example on the latter part
of the slide is just stopping the
animation entirely and that is just a matter
of invalidating the timer that's actually
generating the method calls into your EAGL class.
In your drawing class.
So write efficient shaders is our
number ten on the top ten list.
And number ten is special and it gets
an asterisk because it's not applicable
to both the MBX family and the SGX family.
It's applicable just to the iPhone 3G
S, which is SGX based and OpenGL ES 2.0.
So here's some general tips on
writing, on writing efficient shaders.
Let's go into the, just right into the general tips.
And that is we talked a little bit earlier in
some of the earlier sessions if you were here,
about doing pre-compilation and linking and although the
complication and linking is going to happen on the device,
try and keep in mind that that state is
very expensive to compute and you know,
it's kind of like, it's like a set of derived state.
You send in to the implementation, here's my
shader source and then you want the implementation
to derive an efficient compiled binary
out of that that you're running with.
And when you do that it's unlike any other kind of GL
state where you could just you know, poke a bit in there
and say OK there, it's ready to go, it's you know
blending's enabled, etc, etc. It's a very important
that that's an initialization time
operation if that's not obvious enough.
Unrolling small loops.
There's always an overhead associated with
any execution where a loop is processed.
If the loop overhead can be removed by a small,
in a small, well the loop overhead can be removed
if you have a small enough loop and just,
even just simply unroll it in your shader.
Using static array access is if possible.
Whenever you set up an array in a shader and you do
static array accesses, it tells the compiler essentially,
what elements of the array are being accessed and can
effectively throw away unused elements and do better
at kind of register allocation if you will.
And then there's always a cost associated with branching
and especially so on GPU's because branching can,
it's obvious that branching is going to be needed for
any real program, but using so judiciously will help kind
of minimize the tendency to break parallelism in the device.
Because these are, they're [inaudible]
devices, they were meant,
a shader is meant to process shading hardware rather
is meant to process multiple logical instances
of vertex shaders and multiple logical instances
of fragment shaders and any time you kind of break
that parallelism, you're going to get lesser performance.
So moving on to respect device limits.
There are various qualified variable types in GLSL
and those are uniforms, attributes and varyings.
Shading architecture is always take the
variables and try to keep things in registers
like any journalized computing architecture and if
you respect the device limits by querying the limits
for uniforms, variants and attribs, you get two benefits.
One your code is guaranteed to work right and you don't get
that guarantee if you don't, if you exceed these limits.
It may work, it may not.
And two you get better performance.
And these analagous calls here are just, are these simple
get integer calls to determine what the max limit on some
of these are and you notice here in the get
integer call it says, uniform and fragment vectors.
So it's actually telling you how many vectorvec4s you
can get or how many vec4s are valid on the system.
And if you're interested in looking at packing
rules and things like that about declaring kind
of heterogeneous data types for you shaders, you can
look at that more in the GLSL, ESGL, SL specification.
So moving on.
Hoisting computation up and out.
Fragment shaders and vertex shaders execute a lot
and the tendency, especially when you have a screen
with a small screen like an embedded
device, the fragment shading operations tend
to be the overwhelming majority if the computation.
So if you can take any operation that was in the
fragment shader and move it up into the vertex shader,
you're likely to save computation, similarly if you can take
that computation out of the vertex shader and hoist it up
and make it like a uniform, like keep
it constant across all the vertices,
you're going to save a lot of computation as well.
You know, taking a lighting example, if
you're doing per pixel lighting and a shader,
maybe you can get away with per vertex
lighting and even with per-vertex lighting,
maybe you can get away with doing an inverse transform
on the light and model space and preventing any
of those you know, basically a multiply
in the vertex shader in doing so.
So try to take a look at the lighting model that
you've chosen for instance or any other operation
that may be reasonable to hoist to a higher level in
the chain and see if you can get the results you desire
without you know, getting down into that nitty gritty of
you know, the fragment of the vertex shader at that level.
So efficient texture fetching.
So texture fetching logic in the MBX and the SGX systems
is dedicated silicone on the chip and it's separate
from the rest of the shading architecture.
So if you can issue a texture fetch early in your shader,
you're increasing the parallelism and
the overall performance of your app.
So try to issue your fetches from the shader early
and that's simply the texture 2D look up call
that you're seeing at the bottom of the slide here.
That is the fetch operation.
You can issue that early in the shader
you're going to get better performance.
The second bullet there is avoiding dependent texture reads.
A dependent texture read is defined as any time your
fragment shader takes a texture coordinate value
and changes it by any amount.
That's a dependent texture read.
And what that effectively does is it creates a dependency,
a serialization in your fragment shader, as of that instant.
Because it can no longer take that fetch operation, hoist
it out of the shading logic and execute it into parallel
because the shading logic itself is
computing the coordinate you're trying to use.
So it by definition has to happen
downstream of that calculation.
You know sometimes you know, the example here is
showing just a simple bias to a texture coordinate.
So this variant, this texture coordinate variant is
coming in and a bias, a simple bias is being applied to it
and that simple add is enough to serialize that fetch.
You know, there are other examples of like you know, if
you have two texture units enabled and you're using one
for instance as a look up into another,
so you have one texture that's defined
with coordinates in it and then you fetch from that.
Then you grab the coordinates out of it and then
you use those coordinates to fetch from another one.
That's a dependent texture read as well.
So if you can avoid that and make your algorithm
work around that, you'll get better performance.
So making empirical precision choices
is the last in our shader tips.
And the addition of the shading language to ES
2.0 came, brought with it precision qualifiers
and there are three precision qualifiers, lowp,
mediump and highp, as you see on the slide there.
Each of those has a certain range
in precision associated with it.
With a lowp that's probably going to be the most kind
of outlyers, as far as general understanding is
because it's got this range of
-2 to +2 and 8 bits of precision.
Mediump and highp can be considered you
know, like the iEEE spec and they're kind
of basic terms of half precision and single precision.
It's very important, well I guess first, this kind of
floating, varying lowp color code up here on the right,
that example is listed as a known example of where you
can get a lot of efficiency by reducing the fidelity
of your color, your incoming color varying.
We've noticed, the GL team has noticed a
lot of kind of performance efficiency there.
The GPU can do parallelism with these lower,
these lower precision varyings and you know,
combine them as a SIMB operation
so you get higher throughput.
So that's kind of a canonical example of using lowp.
But when it comes to generally deciding how
do I qualify my shader variables by precision,
you really need to be empirical when you do that.
The first step is kind of a few step process and
the first thing is you can set up your shader
in relatively high precision or the highest precision, in
highp, get the results that you want and then you can kind
of successfully, successively refactor
those, some of those values down.
Bring a highp into a medium or a medium to a low
and see first if you're getting the correct results,
the render results are satisfactory for your application
and second, do you actually get more performance.
Because it's not guaranteed that going from you know,
one of the higher levels to the lower levels is going
to give you more performance by any stretch.
I mean, it could actually cause the other direction.
Depends on how the compiled code is generated so,
you always need to validate that and be empirical
about making decisions about your precision qualifiers.
So with that, I'll hand it back to Benj
and he can go through these few tips here.
>> Thanks John.
So before we do one last check in on the performance
of OptimizeMe, I just wanted to show you a comparison,
zoom in on this so you can see a little better.
No, too much.
OK. So this is on the left, slow version of a particular
vertex shader and on the right, the fast version.
And I just want to highlight a few things here
First is the incoming color to the vertex shader.
In the slow version, it's a per-vertex attribute,
whereas in the fast version we're using uniform color.
Just so happens that in our tessellated spheres,
that we just have a color for each quadrant.
A base color for each quadrant.
So we didn't actually need to use per vertex colors.
Next thing there, John was just
talking about, highp versus lowp.
For colors, we can often get away with
lowp and we're able to do that here.
So I'm using lowp for our color varying.
I would point at each thing, but
I'm zoomed in so I can't do that.
The last thing in the vertex shader that
I want to point out in difference is
in the texture coordinate that we're writing out.
In the slow version, we're writing
out the object space vertex position
and we're going to use that as a texture coordinate.
But that's going to range from -1 to +1 and
in order to use it to index into a texture,
we're going to need to map it to the range 0 to +1.
So in the slow version, we don't think too
much about it and we just decide all right,
fragment shader can do that right before it fetches.
No problem.
In the fast version, we are doing this hoist that John
was talking about and we're hoisting that computation
so that we do it on a per vertex
basis instead of a per pixel basis.
So you can see the scale by one half and the
offset by one half, happening in the fast version
of the shader before we write out that texture coordinate.
So now if we switch to the matching fragment shader.
OK again the first diff is just
the highp versus the lowp color.
Next thing you'll see here is the work that we hoisted
out of the vertex shader, out of the fragment shader
in the fast version while it's still
sitting here in the slow version.
So we are calculating a scaled and biased texture
coordinate based on the incoming texture coordinate
in the slow fragment shader and not only is that costing
us the performance of actually having to do that scale
and multiply, the multiply and add on a per pixel basis
but it also hits this dependent texture
read case that John was talking about.
So the fast path is to use your texture coordinate as is, as
it was interpolated, use it directly for your texture fetch.
Here we are doing some math operations on it before using it
for the texture fetch, causing us to fall off that fast path
and so don't do that if, you can avoid it.
And the last difference here is you remember from
way back, tip number one, getting rid of the discard.
You'll see the discard in the slow fragment shader here,
in the fast one we've turned on blending, we don't need it,
much faster because it doesn't take us off the
fast path or tile based deferred rendering.
And so without further adieu, let's
bring up the phone next to the code.
And let's turn on our fast shaders and you can see that we
have gone up to about hovering towards 40 frames per second.
That's up from the original 6 1/2 frames per second.
So all you had to do was follow these top ten
tips and recognize the performance improvement.
So hopefully showing you what the wrong way of doing things
is, how not to do things, you might be able to remove some
of the evil code from your own applications.
Send it back to John to talk about
some, the art of finding the bottleneck.
>> OK. Thank you Benj.
[ applause ]
OK, so we've talked about these various approaches
and if you're going to follow those guidelines,
you're definitely going to get, your application's
going to be much closer to that you know,
kind of sweet spot on the performance curve for the devices.
But how do you go about looking for those
problems once you've got an application written?
The finding bottlenecks thing is common to any GL
programming, every kind of pipeline architecture,
at least that we're familiar with, has
always got different parts or components
of it where you can run into limitations.
And it can be a little disheartening at times.
Like if you go and you look at your app and it's running
at 12 frames a second and you're trying to target 30
and you spend two weeks like reworking your
entire scene database with all you vertex data,
making it incredibly efficient, only to find out that
you in fact were fragment limited and it doesn't matter
if you were only rendering one vertex,
your frame rate wouldn't change.
So the key is to find what stage your application is limited
by and the key of the key of finding that one stage is
to find the fewest strings to pull or the
least turning of knobs and pulling of levers
to make your application respond by increased frame rate.
So some of these limitations, we're
going to go through those.
CPU limited is you know, if you're doing scene calling
or you know, view custom calling or physics
in your application, you can use Shark and
see if in fact you have a CPU hotspot there.
If your CPU's pegged at 100%, it's
pretty likely that a little bit of tuning
on that side is going to give you an increase in frame rate.
So vertex processing limited.
If you have lots of huge vertices in your application,
you're trying to render battleships or something
on your phone, you can run into
bandwidth limitations pretty easily.
And we talked about some of the kind of optimization
techniques of using the smaller vertex attribute types,
the real kind of key there again is looking for those
easy things to touch is the conversion, to VBOs.
Aligning your vertex data is probably more difficult.
You know, using smaller vertex data types and
aligning your vertex data are probably more difficult
to do than to switch to VBO's.
So you always should kind of successfully start
with the you know, the low hanging fruit and then go
through the more sophisticated manners
of eliciting this vertex limitation.
And those bullets are a little bit
out of order now that I look at them.
It really should be, they convert the
VBO's first, then perhaps the smaller size
and then that line vertex data after that.
And then you can also be shading limited.
If you running the ES 2.0 application, take your vertex
shader that does all this fancy stuff and bumpmapping
or whatever it's doing and put a pass through
shader, just punch a pass through shader in there.
Obviously your rendering is not going to be what you want
but if you boom you've got 5 more frames a second out of it,
you know that maybe limiting some of the operations
you're doing there or finding another technique
or hoisting is going to result in improved performance.
So if you're using massive textures in your application,
obviously we talked about using the compressed
and mipmap textures, if your textures are already mipmap,
you can try and determine if you're texture fetch limited.
Like in the architecture, whether
it's fix function or programmable.
By using the LOD bias values.
Both ES 1.1 and ES 2.0, have ways to set the
texture level higher which will effectively make it
such that the GPU is fetching from a smaller texture
level and when it's fetching from a smaller texture level,
it's not blowing the caches out as much,
the memory bandwidth requirements are lower
and you may actually see a performance
difference simply by setting that.
And then if that becomes the case, then take
a more close look at how you're fetching.
Can you move that up earlier in your fragment
shader for instance, can you reduce the size
of the levels you're using, you use compress textures,
etc. So moving on from that, fragment shading limited.
This is, the fragment shading limited is the
easiest kind of lever to pull and that is
that you can just simply take your
window size and make it smaller.
If you're generating fewer fragments, limitations
and computing those fragments are going to show
up pretty quickly in your frame rate so, make a
quick change of the size of the window, the viewport,
render fewer fragments and see what you get.
Then similar to the vertex optimization
tip, make a pass through fragment shader.
Just write the color out and you know, bypass your
entire fragment shader and see if you get a result there.
And then once you've made that determination, if
you decided yes in fact I am fragment limited,
then just do some successive refinement to your
fragment shader, maybe use a less sophisticated method.
Sometimes you can get away with lesser methods on a
smaller screen and things, things are less perceptible,
especially if you're porting from a desktop app where
you're required to run at 1600x1200 for instance.
So compositing limited is probably a little bit of a
new kind of bottleneck consideration if you're coming
from a desktop or you know, various
other GL implementations.
And that is just looking to see that you're
efficiently using the iPhone compositing system.
And we talked earlier about using GL to do the landscape
transforms and making sure that your GL layer's opaque
and at the bottom of the stack so
that the compositing is simplified.
But the compositing check is another quick lever
to flip, which is just switch the compositing off.
Just render the GL only.
If rendering your HUD on top of your game for instance, is
causing a problem or if you're trying to render something
in fact below you game even worse yet, if you quickly,
if you disable compositing by setting the layer property
to opaque like we talked about earlier, you'll
see, you could very well see a frame rate increase.
So summarizing today's session.
If you have existing applications, start by identifying
those bottlenecks and look for those real easy,
easy things to tweak to see if you can get some, you
know elicit some changes with increases in frame rate.
And batching your drawing state.
There's, the spectrum of yes, here's my ideal application
domain kind of object oriented representation of the data
and way over here is the pipeline optimal
kind of representation of that same data.
So look at that spectrum and that's something
that's obviously desirable to do before you kind
of write your game and during the design process.
But batching that drawing state and minimizing
state changes, getting as much state you know,
grouping all of your scene data into these various
groups is a really easy way to increase performance.
Choosing appropriate data types, formats and
precision and just conserving memory where possible.
I mean, that's kind of common sense stuff but,
it's always something that's got to be looked at.
Accounting for your variable declarations in your shaders
and respecting those device limits we talked about.
And then finally, knowing how tile base deferred
renderer differs from a stream renderer that you know,
many of the applications and again, if you have ported or
whatever, there can be some ramifications there you know,
there's many applications out there that are doing text
sub image calls regularly and if there's a way to architect
around that, you're going to get better performance.
So that's the rundown for today's session.
There's a related session to this that is not GL
specifically, but just application tuning on the Mac OS
on the iPhone platform, on the iPhone family and
that's tomorrow or rather Friday morning at 9 am.
And then there are a couple of labs that were mentioned
in previous sessions, both tomorrow, one at 9 am,
and one at noon and many of the guys you see here from
the GL embedded team are going to be at those labs
and you can ask as many questions as you
can fit into those time slots I suppose.
And then documentation.
Apple is incredible about documentations.
One of the things I love about developing on the platform
is that you go to the developer website and I've worked
with these documentation guys, they're amazing.
They produce incredibly clear and concise
documentation to really kind of help you along.
So check out that url on Apple's site
and then look at the Khronos website
for the GL ES specification and the extension registry.
And again, pointing to Allan Schaffer
as our graphics evangelist.
For more information, you can contact him.